which is just how much we miss Phil.
It's really... We also have a sense of his presence, too, I must say, but that's
kind of something that I just want to acknowledge, because it underlies the
whole conversation in some fashion, but the sense of the... It's still very
recently for most of us that he died, and it's still kind of hard to believe
that he's not around and that you can't just call him up or that he can come to
hear Satchiko's concert or talk with me about these books coming out or anything
else. and I think in fact a small group of his friends are going to be getting
together this weekend and I know in Orange County at Tim Powers' house his gang
that he describes in the still meets basically every Thursday night and we all
have a tremendous sense as is in a sense kind of similar to what Angel expresses
about her dead friends and so forth in Timothy Archer The loss and also the kind
of power of that friendship and relationship and the way that this feeling of
missing Phil doesn't go away Anyway, go ahead. Talk about the fine nutrition.
And then, well, in case you want to say something.
OK. We had the tape rolling during that. Is that OK? Yeah, that's fine. OK. Just
wanted you to know. No, that's... Well, there's not much I can say. That's all
right. Okay. Back to the real world. I understand that you named Divine Invasion
Divine Invasion. What was his original name and then how come it was necessary
to rename it? The original name is Vallas Regained. Vallas Regained. like
Paradise Regained,
which is a beautiful name. I like the name Pallas Regained. It has certain
problems from the publisher's point of view, which is that it was being
published by a different publisher than Pallas. It has none of the same
characters and isn't set in the same world really as Pallas. It isn't even the
same kind of book so that anybody Everybody looking for another book like Pallas
that was spelled at the time would feel cheated by the title promising more
Pallas, and then it being nothing like that. And I think there was also a
concern that Pallas was this strange book that maybe nobody would like and
wasn't that smart to tie the next book's success to people's reaction to Pallas,
which hadn't come out yet. Now, as it turned out, Vowles was a very big success,
quite unexpectedly, even to the publisher. They thought they were going to sell
15,000, and they sold 85 immediately, and it's like 150 at this point, which is
very, very good. Anyway,
funny to call a book, Vowles Regained, that has none of the same characters, but
on another level, it's perfect, because it is the sequel to Paradise Lost,
Paradise Regained, since two Vowles, I happened to be in the editor's office
when a letter came from Phil kind of halfheartedly offering alternate titles
most of them very silly none of them that I could see anyway or I guess that the
editor could see that had much chance of being a description of the book or an
epocative title for the book but more like say
all right, you don't like my beautiful title, why don't you call it, you know,
Calactic Pot Boiler or something.
And so walking to Grand Central Station from from David's office in Midtown
Manhattan
I guess I thought about what would be a good title for the book. and suddenly
hit on the idea of the divine in-fusion as somehow sounding science-fictional
and also being an accurate description of an event, a main event that happens in
the novel. And Phil didn't like the title at all at first. He automatically came
to love it. After a year later, virtually, he told me so. I'd admitted at that
point that he'd hated it originally, which I knew. But that was how it came to
be. I happened to propose a possible name that happened to get accepted. It was
ironic that stuff like this was always happening between me and so... And it
always seemed to work out nicely, which is like the Rolling Stone piece. We were
both really always glad that it worked out that way. you know that David
Hartwell and I originally published Confessions of a Craft Artist back in 1975
yeah I'm a collector and I somehow missed out on that one I had a chance to get
it and for some reason I couldn't and I've regretted it ever since because I
haven't found another copy yet yeah I guess there weren't that many of them I'm
really glad that it's now you know widely available and again that was a
gratification to Phil to know that that was coming and I have known a lot of
people I must say who don't read science fiction can't make head or tail science
fiction who have read Confessions and become very excited about Phil as a writer
you know they could read it because it's not science fiction And then that would
lead them into a second group. So I think that Confessions and the
Transmigration coming out may help a lot to introduce new readers who aren't
science fiction readers and quote, have trouble with science fiction.
Help introduce them to his work, just as, of course, Blade Runner introduced
people to Bill's work, however, backhandly, because 400,000 or 500,000 copies of
Androids have sold them.
I'll ask one more question about Divine Invasion. I kind of sense that it's
getting a little bit lost, because Vallas blew people away, and then
Transmigration was his last book, and it wasn't science fiction, and I don't
hear a lot about Divine Invasion, and to me, it's almost an amalgamation, a
perfect amalgamation of his old... the old Phil Dick with the paranoia and his
characters, the way he jumps between scenes. and then his newfound visions. And
to me, I almost enjoyed it as much as anything else I've ever read by him. And I
don't hear that much about it, either from critics or from friends either. Yeah.
I know many people who feel as you do, who care about the book very, very
deeply. And it's true that, with some exceptions, there have been a few really
wonderful reviews. it hasn't gotten the attention that that it really deserves
but I suspect that will change over a period of time just because so many people
have had the kind of powerful experience with the novel that you described it's
certainly a shame that it doesn't have a Hugo or Nebula nomination
but I don't think will get lost. I don't know yet, but I'm very hopeful that now
that it's out in paperback and with the continuing growth of interest in Phil's
work, it may be very popular. Again, it is in some funny way a book that people
who are not science fiction leaders also can get into if they happen to fall
across it.
Okay now for the obvious question about Blade Runner how did do androids dream
of electric sheep get picked up as a possible movie novel I know how the name
got changed that sort of thing but was it picked up a long time ago or was it
recently discovered it's a long typical Hollywood story which I know only pieces
of it's And this guy, Herb Jaffe, who's been around MGM and the movie world for
quite a while, I think, bought it at one point. I don't know that he was the
first person to buy it, but he might have been. And his son or him wrote a
screenplay, which was like a comedy. It was ridiculous. And the guy came to
visit Phil, and Phil told him so. and this was back in you know 73, 74 and but
it was really wanted to see the movie made and it changed hands but there's a
description by that fellow or whatever his name is who co-wrote the screenplay
who had the option for a while of how he got involved in it and ultimately sold
it to Ridley Scott and so forth. There's a description of that in an interview
in Starlog, I think, in which sort of the authors of the screenplay answered
what Phil Dick said about them in his interview with Starlog two months earlier,
except that they have to deal with the embarrassing fact that the man they're
talking about has just died. And at the same time, defend their movie.
But what happened in any event has to do with somebody owning an option and it
got turned into this and it got turned into that and somebody else bought the
that and bought the option along with it and the that was turned into several
different doses and it really I'm sure had zero to do with the novel Androids
for a while and then later stages more of the premises and sort of the theme of
of Philip's novel were added back in. So that, in my view, there's quite a bit
of Philip Dick in Blade Runner. But it's by some long, serendipitous process
that has much more to do with Hollywood than him. And that, as he said, was very
unexpected to him. He thought he would be absolutely awful. and finally I concur
I feel pretty much as most of the people I've spoken to and any reviews I've
read that the movie is a failure because of the you know is a failure in at
least many senses because of the hopelessness of the script and the woodenness
the delivery and just the fact that they concentrated so on the scene that they
threw away the story. Not just a still story but any story. And that there's no
believability there. And it's a shame because the setting that they created is
so fantastic that they could have had a very powerful and very, very successful
movie there if they had just been a little more conscious of making a story that
people could get into and that would work. to happen within that setting. But I
do want to see the movie again because Philip Dick wrote a series of novels in
the late 1960s, one of which is Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep and there's
Galactic Pot Healer and Yubik and Three Sigma, Palmer Eldritch in a sense and
Now Wave for Last Year and some others that all depict a sort of extraordinary,
extraordinary, burned-out, urban future
in which, let's face it, it's just very hard to get out of bed in the morning
and have to deal with the fact that this is reality and which was always the
kind of, you know, a description, a clef, of the contemporary world and a very
brilliant one and that was uniquely Philip Dick and the scene that really Scott
has created in Blade Runner with all the people who worked on the very special
effects and so forth is very much that world, that setting that Phil created
uniquely in his novels. And when he saw a minute and a half of tapes from Blade
Runner on a news program like that more than a year ago, just sitting alone in
his apartment one day, he had this just extraordinary epiphany of realizing that
that was the inside of his brain, there on the TV set that had been put into
this movie and it was just an absolutely extraordinary thing that had happened
and even though it's frustrating that there's no damn story there and therefore
there really isn't what you can call a good movie
that material the portrayal of the background the brilliant background of the
Philip Dick world of those late 60's novels and certain of the situations I
mean, Rachel is a perfect Philip Dick, dark-haired girl visually and you know in
certain other ways the personality and the appearance is precisely the dark
-haired girl who shows up in We Can Build You and Androids and you know many of
other those novels so again it's an extraordinary to go to this movie and see
her there and it relates a lot to Phil's work so it's just strange you know it's
not a good movie and it's not satisfying and yet one can't help but feel
fascinated by it and knows that it's somehow important Did he ever see it or see
most of it? He saw Rush's and he may have seen you know half of it or more but
he I don't believe he ever saw a full film or even a full rough edit as far as I
know. Do you know if any other of his novels have been picked up somewhere along
the line, maybe a movie someday? Oh, yes. There are two quite serious projects,
although Hollywood, I don't know how serious they are this week as opposed to
last week, but two major projects that a lot of energy has gone into already and
that are close to, if not in production, by major studios. One is called Plaw,
and it's from the novelette, Second Variety, that goes way back to 1954 and
appeared in a collection called The Variable Man. And it's a typical Boebecian
setup where these killing machines have been created and new generations of
killing machines that are more effective that just go out and seek out living
flesh and cut it to shreds. And this future war has reached a point where, to
make things efficient, the machines themselves turn out the next generation of
machines. And the machines start pretending to be people, to entrap people, you
know, as part of their hunting capabilities. So it's a classic, philboid,
paranoid horror story. And it's being made by Capital Pictures into a movie
called Claw. And the other major project that's going on is, I don't know much
about, but Disney is at least heavily into pre-production on something called
Total Recall, which is the 1960s short story, We Can Remember It For You
Wholesale, which appeared in many best-of-the-year anthologies. I think it's
from fantasy and science fiction.
which I want to attempt to give a plot synopsis of because I haven't read it
recently enough. I think it involves, again, a standard Pildikian situation of
kind of reliving your memories in an artificial way and trying to figure out
which of these adventures are really happening. And there have been other books
optioned at different times.
Jean-Pierre Gorin and Edwin Godard's the movie-making partner for years, very
earnestly wanted to do Ubic. And Phil wrote a screenplay for Ubic, but nothing
ever came of it, but I certainly wouldn't be surprised to see that come up
again. I think that you'll see, if we ever see some good movies made of Phil
Dick's work, there are lots that have come from abroad. And at one point, there
was a French interest in doing Confessions of a Craft Artist. And I think that
would be extraordinary if that ever happened, because you'd get this, you know,
French view of America in this novel about California in the 50s by a very
American writer and it might be terrific. I don't think that Hollywood is likely
to do anything more meaningful to Phil Dix works than the very expensive, very
bizarre, fascinating,
mixed emotion kind of thing that they've done in Blackhound. Hubik would make a
hell of a movie, have you think?
I guess it was in your Fair Well to Iman Locus where there's this apocryphal
story that he turned down $400,000 to write a novelization. I applaud his doing
that. I think that's great. But was he just in a financial position and felt a
strong enough artistic sensibilities to turn that kind of money down? I mean, he
didn't have four hundred thousand dollars.
But, he had more money than he needed because he was a very modest man. All he
really needed to do was sit in his apartment and help his friends and study
theology and sometimes write, and that was really what he was into. You know, he
had a car, but he didn't drive it. so the principal really did matter to him a
lot more and I'm not sure though that it would have been any different if he'd
been starving and it wasn't that he just totally turned it down out of hand it
just
he and his agent both agreed that it just wasn't right as the situation
developed for a situation to come about where his book, Androids, couldn't be in
print because that was what they wanted. The androids had to be suppressed so
that Blade Runner could come out. And it was also impossible for him to write
really a novelization of any movie, no matter how good, and certainly of a
screenplay that he thought was awful. And it just developed into this situation
where they were offering in deals that they claimed were worth $400,000,
literally, pieces of this, and shares of this, marketing rights, and so forth,
and where he could just stand there and say, no, what's going to happen is that
you're going to put out androids, and I'm going to get $25,000 and a lousy
royalty, but you're going to publish androids, and that's it. And ultimately, of
course, that's what happened. But they were very angry with him at the studio
and fought it for a long time.
But it was just... I think for him it was a thrill and a privilege to get to
make such a truly principled stand to such an outrageous degree. And he always,
you know, he knew what was right and what was right for his work.
okay okay two questions may be hard to answer, may be easy to answer um... what
would he have done, where would he have gone in his writing?
just a sec, um...
If he had lived to a ripe old age, I'm sure he would have kept writing. And
whatever he would have written would have been absolutely extraordinary. But
indeed, there's no possible way to guess what it might have been. I mean, he was
about to write a new novel at the time that he died. He'd been thinking about it
for quite some time. He had a plot which probably would have been discarded and
used as part of the basis for another one. And he had a title, The Owl in
Daylight. And he'd written a few pages. As far as I know, that's probably it.
And that book was extremely ambitious. What little I know about it. and
the character would have been modeled partly after himself and partly after
Beethoven who had his birthday and it would have been a really challenging
literary and imaginative and science fictional undertaking and I think that his
enthusiasm for his work at the time that he's been working on these last three
or four books, and the enthusiasm he continued to feel
guarantees that the
next novels to come along would have been as extraordinary and probably as
different as The Divine Invasion had found in Timothy Archer.
But more than that, there's no way that I know of for anyone to imagine, except
that he would have taken his themes to the next logical stage, but operating
under a logic that is his alone, and that really died with him. except that it
lives in many, many writings, and unpublished nonfiction writings as well as
fiction. There's a logic that is unlike anything else in this universe, but it
could be remembered as a philosopher as much as a novelist based on what he's
already done and based on a lot of material that's never been published and that
would probably be too difficult for, you know, all but a handful of people to
read. And yet he still might be one of the most original and brilliant
philosophers of the century. Is that how you think he would want to be
remembered as a philosopher more than as a writer? No. No. I mean, I think it
might have told him to be remembered as that also. But no, certainly, he was a
novelist and a writer and would, you know, whatever that means, would want to be
remembered for that and for his work. But certainly it would be extraordinarily
gratifying to him if people discovered some of the other levels of his work as
well. I mean, that is to say that, among other things, what's called the
exegesis, which is a real and very earnest work, which none of us have seen
anything like all of, and I haven't seen that much yet. And as I say, it's
challenging going, and yet it's a totally passionate and intense,
brilliant, far-reaching exploration of the nature of the universe,
particularly from its philosophical, theological point of view.
S. And I'd rather hope that some of that material will certainly that will be
available in libraries and stuff. And it will someday be published in some form
and I think that his letters will be published and his letters are brilliant and
incredibly funny. I mean he's just, he's got an amazing gift, you know, one of
the funniest epistolary writers ever, and I think that that work will surface at
a given time, just because of its quality. Who has the power to, or the ability
to see that such things do come out eventually? The power rests with his estate.
And his heirs, one of his heirs is the administrator of the estate. and that's
ultimately where the power lies and
I imagine you know that those agents would and should play an important role in
suggesting what's best for his career as it were but we'll really have to see
what develops there I know there's a lot of interest in this sort of thing. And
I feel confident that it will come about in time. But what how soon or what will
happen next is very, very hard to say. At least it is for me. I don't know.
Paul, thanks very much for spending the time with us, not only the physical
time, but the emotional time. I'm sure this isn't a real easy thing to do even
now. And we appreciate getting your insight into Phil Dick. Thank you. It's a
pleasure to know, you know, which I do know that there are so many people who
really care about him and his work and are fascinated by it to the degree that I
am, to the grand few.
Great. I still say whenever something appears about him in the Wall Street
Journal, times have changed. There should be more of that. That's really
something. Okay. Great. I would love to see the